The Dursleys had never exactly starved Harry, but he’d never been allowed to eat as much as he liked. Dudley had always taken anything that Harry really wanted, even if it made him sick. Harry piled his plate with a bit of everything except the humbugs and began to eat. It was all delicious.
‘That does look good,’ said the ghost in the ruff sadly, watching Harry cut up his steak.
‘Can’t you –?’
‘I haven’t eaten for nearly five hundred years,’ said the ghost. ‘I don’t need to, of course, but one does miss it. I don’t think I’ve introduced myself? Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington at your service. Resident ghost of Gryffindor Tower.’
‘I know who you are!’ said Ron suddenly. ‘My brothers told me about you – you’re Nearly Headless Nick!’
‘I would prefer you to call me Sir Nicholas de Mimsy –’ the ghost began stiffly, but sandy-haired Seamus Finnigan interrupted.
‘Nearly Headless? How can you be nearly headless?’
Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their little chat wasn’t going at all the way he wanted.
‘Like this,’ he said irritably. He seized his left ear and pulled. His whole head swung off his neck and fell on to his shoulder as if it was on a hinge. Someone had obviously tried to behead him, but not done it properly. Looking pleased at the stunned looks on their faces, Nearly Headless Nick flipped his head back on to his neck, coughed and said, ‘So – new Gryffindors! I hope you’re going to help us win the House Championship this year? Gryffindor have never gone so long without winning. Slytherin have got the cup six years in a row! The Bloody Baron’s becoming almost unbearable – he’s the Slytherin ghost.’
Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and saw a horrible ghost sitting there, with blank staring eyes, a gaunt face and robes stained with silver blood. He was right next to Malfoy who, Harry was pleased to see, didn’t look too pleased with the seating arrangements.
‘How did he get covered in blood?’ asked Seamus with great interest.
‘I’ve never asked,’ said Nearly Headless Nick delicately.
When everyone had eaten as much as they could, the remains of the food faded from the plates, leaving them sparkling clean as before. A moment later the puddings appeared. Blocks of ice-cream in every flavour you could think of, apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolate eclairs and jam doughnuts, trifle, strawberries, jelly, rice pudding ...
As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talk turned to their families.
‘I’m half and half,’ said Seamus. ‘Me dad’s a Muggle. Mam didn’t tell him she was a witch ’til after they were married. Bit of a nasty shock for him.’
The others laughed.
‘What about you, Neville?’ said Ron.
‘Well, my gran brought me up and she’s a witch,’ said Neville, ‘but the family thought I was all Muggle for ages. My great-uncle Algie kept trying to catch me off my guard and force some magic out of me – he pushed me off the end of Blackpool pier once, I nearly drowned – but nothing happened until I was eight. Great-uncle Algie came round for tea and he was hanging me out of an upstairs window by the ankles when my great-auntie Enid offered him a meringue and he accidentally let go. But I bounced – all the way down the garden and into the road. They were all really pleased. Gran was crying, she was so happy. And you should have seen their faces when I got in here – they thought I might not be magic enough to come, you see. Great-uncle Algie was so pleased he bought me my toad.’
On Harry’s other side, Percy Weasley and Hermione were talk­ing about lessons (‘I do hope they start straight away, there’s so much to learn, I’m particularly interested in Transfiguration, you know, turning something into something else, of course, it’s supposed to be very difficult –’; ‘You’ll be starting small, just matches into needles and that sort of thing –’).
Harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy, looked up at the High Table again. Hagrid was drinking deeply from his goblet. Professor McGonagall was talking to Professor Dumbledore. Professor Quirrell, in his absurd turban, was talking to a teacher with greasy black hair, a hooked nose and sallow skin.
It happened very suddenly. The hook-nosed teacher looked past Quirrell’s turban straight into Harry’s eyes – and a sharp, hot pain shot across the scar on Harry’s forehead.
‘Ouch!’ Harry clapped a hand to his head.
‘What is it?’ asked Percy.
‘N-nothing.’
The pain had gone as quickly as it had come. Harder to shake off was the feeling Harry had got from the teacher’s look – a feel­ing that he didn’t like Harry at all.
‘Who’s that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell?’ he asked Percy.
‘Oh, you know Quirrell already, do you? No wonder he’s look­ing so nervous, that’s Professor Snape. He teaches Potions, but he doesn’t want to – everyone knows he’s after Quirrell’s job. Knows an awful lot about the Dark Arts, Snape.’
Harry watched Snape for a while but Snape didn’t look at him again.
At last, the puddings too disappeared and Professor Dumbledore got to his feet again. The Hall fell silent.
‘Ahem – just a few more words now we are all fed and watered. I have a few start-of-term notices to give you.
‘First-years should note that the forest in the grounds is forbid­den to all pupils. And a few of our older students would do well to remember that as well.’
Dumbledore’s twinkling eyes flashed in the direction of the Weasley twins.
‘I have also been asked by Mr Filch, the caretaker, to remind you all that no magic should be used between classes in the corri­dors.
‘Quidditch trials will be held in the second week of term. Anyone interested in playing for their house teams should contact Madam Hooch.
‘And finally, I must tell you that this year, the third-floor corridor on the right-hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to die a very painful death.’
Harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did.
‘He’s not serious?’ he muttered to Percy.
‘Must be,’ said Percy, frowning at Dumbledore. ‘It’s odd, because he usually gives us a reason why we’re not allowed to go some­where – the forest’s full of dangerous beasts, everyone knows that. I do think he might have told us Prefects, at least.’
‘And now, before we go to bed, let us sing the school song!’ cried Dumbledore. Harry noticed that the other teachers’ smiles had become rather fixed.
Dumbledore gave his wand a little flick as if he was trying to get a fly off the end and a long golden ribbon flew out of it, which rose high above the tables and twisted itself snake-like into words.
‘Everyone pick their favourite tune,’ said Dumbledore, ‘and off we go!’
And the school bellowed:

‘Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts,
Teach us something please,
Whether we be old and bald
Or young with scabby knees,
Our heads could do with filling
With some interesting stuff,
For now they’re bare and full of air,
Dead flies and bits of fluff,
So teach us things worth knowing,
Bring back what we’ve forgot,
Just do your best, we’ll do the rest,
And learn until our brains all rot.’

Everybody finished the song at different times. At last, only the Weasley twins were left singing along to a very slow funeral march. Dumbledore conducted their last few lines with his wand, and when they had finished, he was one of those who clapped loudest.
‘Ah, music,’ he said, wiping his eyes. ‘A magic beyond all we do here! And now, bedtime. Off you trot!’
The Gryffindor first-years followed Percy through the chatter­ing crowds, out of the Great Hall and up the marble staircase. Harry’s legs were like lead again, but only because he was so tired and full of food. He was too sleepy even to be surprised that the people in the portraits along the corridors whispered and pointed as they passed, or that twice Percy led them through doorways hidden behind sliding panels and hanging tapestries. They climbed more staircases, yawning and dragging their feet, and Harry was just wondering how much further they had to go when they came to a sudden halt.
A bundle of walking sticks was floating in mid-air ahead of them and as Percy took a step towards them they started throwing themselves at him.
‘Peeves,’ Percy whispered to the first-years. ‘A poltergeist.’ He raised his voice, ‘Peeves – show yourself.’
A loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of a balloon, answered.
‘Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron?’
There was a pop and a little man with wicked dark eyes and a wide mouth appeared, floating cross-legged in the air, clutching the walking sticks.
‘Oooooooh!’ he said, with an evil cackle. ‘Ickle firsties! What fun!’
He swooped suddenly at them. They all ducked.
‘Go away, Peeves, or the Baron’ll hear about this, I mean it!’ barked Percy.
Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, dropping the walk­ing sticks on Neville’s head. They heard him zooming away, rattling coats of armour as he passed.
‘You want to watch out for Peeves,’ said Percy, as they set off again. ‘The Bloody Baron’s the only one who can control him, he won’t even listen to us Prefects. Here we are.’
At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress.
‘Password?’ she said.
‘Caput Draconis,’ said Percy, and the portrait swung forward to reveal a round hole in the wall. They all scrambled through it – Neville needed a leg up – and found themselves in the Gryffindor common room, a cosy, round room full of squashy armchairs.
Percy directed the girls through one door to their dormitory and the boys through another. At the top of a spiral staircase – they were obviously in one of the towers – they found their beds at last: five four-posters hung with deep-red velvet curtains. Their trunks had already been brought up. Too tired to talk much, they pulled on their pyjamas and fell into bed.
‘Great food, isn’t it?’ Ron muttered to Harry through the hang­ings. ‘Get off, Scabbers! He’s chewing my sheets.’
Harry was going to ask Ron if he’d had any of the treacle tart, but he fell asleep almost at once.
Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much, because he had a very strange dream. He was wearing Professor Quirrell’s turban, which kept talking to him, telling him he must transfer to Slytherin at once, because it was his destiny. Harry told the turban he didn’t want to be in Slytherin; it got heavier and heavier; he tried to pull it off but it tightened painfully – and there was Malfoy, laughing at him as he struggled with it – then Malfoy turned into the hook-nosed teacher, Snape, whose laugh became high and cold – there was a burst of green light and Harry woke, sweating and shaking.
He rolled over and fell asleep again, and when he woke next day, he didn’t remember the dream at all.